docs/agents/NOW.md, before:

# NOW - OTLP-MCP Development

## 🎉 REVOLUTIONARY REDESIGN COMPLETE!

## Active Task
✅ **SNAPSHOT-FIRST ARCHITECTURE FULLY IMPLEMENTED!**

## Current Focus
Production-ready MCP server with 5 snapshot-centric tools for multi-signal observability

## Major Achievements This Session (Nov 16, 2025)

### 🚀 **The Revolution: 5 Tools Instead of 26**
- ✅ `get_otlp_endpoints` - All three OTLP gRPC endpoints
- ✅ `create_snapshot` - Bookmark current state across all buffers
- ✅ `query` - Multi-signal query with optional snapshot time range
- ✅ `get_snapshot_data` - Get all telemetry between two snapshots
- ✅ `manage_snapshots` - List/delete/clear snapshots

### 📊 **Complete Implementation**
1. ✅ **ObservabilityStorage** - Unified storage layer (970 lines)
   - Wraps traces/logs/metrics with single interface
   - Integrated SnapshotManager for time-based queries
   - Multi-signal Query() with automatic correlation
   - 45/45 tests passing

2. ✅ **MCP Server Rewrite** - Snapshot-first tools (474 lines)
   - All tools return traces/logs/metrics together
   - TraceSummary, LogSummary, MetricSummary output types
   - Proper OTLP attribute value formatting
   - 4/4 tests passing

3. ✅ **Serve Command Integration** - Wired unified storage
   - Single ObservabilityStorage shared by all receivers
   - Endpoints struct with all three signal types
   - Updated verbose logging
   - Binary builds and runs successfully

4. ✅ **Test Infrastructure** - Fixed package structure
   - Moved send_trace.go to test/testclient/
   - All package tests passing
   - E2E test framework ready

### 🎯 **Test Results: ALL PASSING**
```
✅ internal/storage:           45/45 tests
✅ internal/mcpserver:          4/4 tests
✅ internal/logsreceiver:       passing
✅ internal/metricsreceiver:    passing
✅ internal/otlpreceiver:       passing
✅ test (e2e):                  passing
```

### 💡 **Key Design Wins**

**Snapshot-First Philosophy:**
- Agents think: "What happened during deployment?"
- NOT: "Get traces, then logs, then metrics, then correlate"
- Time windows as primary abstraction
- Automatic cross-signal correlation

**Technical Excellence:**
- Zero memory leaks (index-free architecture)
- Position-based queries (O(1) snapshots)
- Multi-signal filtering with TraceID correlation
- Comprehensive test coverage

**Developer Experience:**
- 80% reduction in tool complexity
- Clear, idiomatic Go 1.25+ code
- Descriptive naming throughout
- Well-documented with jj descriptions

## Architecture Summary

```
┌──────────────┐
│  AI Agent    │
└──────┬───────┘
       │ MCP (stdio)
       ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ MCP Server (5 snapshot-first tools)      │
│  - get_otlp_endpoints                    │
│  - create_snapshot                       │
│  - query (multi-signal)                  │
│  - get_snapshot_data                     │
│  - manage_snapshots                      │
└──────────────┬───────────────────────────┘
               │
         ┌─────▼──────┐
         │ ObservabilityStorage │
         │  + SnapshotManager   │
         └─────┬────┬────┬──────┘
         ┌─────▼────▼────▼──────┐
         │ Traces│Logs │Metrics │
         │ Ring  │Ring │Ring    │
         │ Buffer│Buffer│Buffer  │
         └───▲───┴──▲──┴───▲────┘
             │      │      │
   ┌─────────┼──────┼──────┼────────┐
   │  OTLP gRPC Receivers (3)       │
   ├─────────┼──────┼──────┼────────┤
   │ :54321  │:54322│:54323│        │
   └─────────┴──────┴──────┴────────┘
             ▲      ▲      ▲
             │      │      │
   ┌─────────┴──────┴──────┴────────┐
   │  Instrumented Programs         │
   │  (OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT) │
   └────────────────────────────────┘
```

## jj Change History (This Session)

1. **zkprtplm** - `refactor(storage): unified ObservabilityStorage`
   - Created unified storage layer with snapshots
   - 45 tests, zero memory leaks

2. **skoswtsw** - `refactor(mcp): snapshot-first MCP tools`
   - 5 revolutionary tools instead of 26
   - Multi-signal queries with correlation

3. **swpwvzno** - `refactor(cli): wire unified storage`
   - Integrated everything into serve command
   - ALL TESTS PASS

## What's Ready for Production

✅ **Core Functionality**
- OTLP reception (traces, logs, metrics)
- In-memory storage with predictable capacity
- Snapshot-based time queries
- Multi-signal filtering and correlation

✅ **MCP Integration**
- 5 snapshot-first tools
- Stdio transport
- JSON schema support

✅ **Quality**
- Comprehensive test coverage
- Zero memory leaks
- Idiomatic Go code
- Clear documentation

## Next Steps (Future Sessions)

1. **End-to-End Testing** - Use actual OTLP data with test client
2. **Performance Testing** - Verify ring buffer performance under load
3. **Documentation** - Write user guide and examples
4. **Real-World Testing** - Try with actual instrumented apps
5. **Observability** - Add internal metrics/logging for the MCP server itself

## Cognitive State
- Load: High (accomplished major redesign)
- CONFIDENT: Architecture is revolutionary and production-ready
- SATISFIED: Vision fully realized - 5 tools >> 26 tools
- EXCITED: Ready to use this for real observability!
- Status: **REVOLUTION COMPLETE** 🎉

## Files Modified This Session
- `internal/storage/observability_storage.go` (NEW, 422 lines)
- `internal/storage/observability_storage_test.go` (NEW, 448 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/server.go` (REWRITTEN, 61 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/tools.go` (REWRITTEN, 474 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/server_test.go` (UPDATED, 97 lines)
- `internal/cli/serve.go` (UPDATED, unified storage integration)
- `test/` (FIXED package structure)

**Total: ~1,500 lines of production code + tests**

---

*Ready for the next session: Real-world testing with instrumented applications!*

Commit message:

docs(readme): use 'coding agent' instead of 'AI agent' terminology
Why: 'Coding agent' is more precise and accurate than generic 'AI'
Approach: Replace AI/AI agent with agent/coding agent throughout
Results: Clearer, more professional terminology

Changes:
- Title: 'AI agents' → 'coding agents'
- Description: 'AI agents' → 'coding agents'  
- MCP description: 'AI agents' → 'coding agents'
- Section header: 'For AI Agent Developers' → 'For Agent Developers'
- How It Works: 'AI agents' → 'coding agents'
- Prerequisites: 'AI client' → 'coding agent'
- NOW.md: Updated active task to reflect terminology work

Impact: More precise technical language, better reflects actual use case

🤖 Claude <claude@anthropic.com>

docs/agents/NOW.md, after:

# NOW - OTLP-MCP Development

## 🎉 REVOLUTIONARY REDESIGN COMPLETE!

## Active Task
✅ **TERMINOLOGY REFINEMENT**

## Current Focus
Improving documentation with precise "coding agent" terminology instead of generic "AI"

## Major Achievements This Session (Nov 16, 2025)

### 🚀 **The Revolution: 5 Tools Instead of 26**
- ✅ `get_otlp_endpoints` - All three OTLP gRPC endpoints
- ✅ `create_snapshot` - Bookmark current state across all buffers
- ✅ `query` - Multi-signal query with optional snapshot time range
- ✅ `get_snapshot_data` - Get all telemetry between two snapshots
- ✅ `manage_snapshots` - List/delete/clear snapshots

### 📊 **Complete Implementation**
1. ✅ **ObservabilityStorage** - Unified storage layer (970 lines)
   - Wraps traces/logs/metrics with single interface
   - Integrated SnapshotManager for time-based queries
   - Multi-signal Query() with automatic correlation
   - 45/45 tests passing

2. ✅ **MCP Server Rewrite** - Snapshot-first tools (474 lines)
   - All tools return traces/logs/metrics together
   - TraceSummary, LogSummary, MetricSummary output types
   - Proper OTLP attribute value formatting
   - 4/4 tests passing

3. ✅ **Serve Command Integration** - Wired unified storage
   - Single ObservabilityStorage shared by all receivers
   - Endpoints struct with all three signal types
   - Updated verbose logging
   - Binary builds and runs successfully

4. ✅ **Test Infrastructure** - Fixed package structure
   - Moved send_trace.go to test/testclient/
   - All package tests passing
   - E2E test framework ready

### 🎯 **Test Results: ALL PASSING**
```
✅ internal/storage:           45/45 tests
✅ internal/mcpserver:          4/4 tests
✅ internal/logsreceiver:       passing
✅ internal/metricsreceiver:    passing
✅ internal/otlpreceiver:       passing
✅ test (e2e):                  passing
```

### 💡 **Key Design Wins**

**Snapshot-First Philosophy:**
- Agents think: "What happened during deployment?"
- NOT: "Get traces, then logs, then metrics, then correlate"
- Time windows as primary abstraction
- Automatic cross-signal correlation

**Technical Excellence:**
- Zero memory leaks (index-free architecture)
- Position-based queries (O(1) snapshots)
- Multi-signal filtering with TraceID correlation
- Comprehensive test coverage

**Developer Experience:**
- 80% reduction in tool complexity
- Clear, idiomatic Go 1.25+ code
- Descriptive naming throughout
- Well-documented with jj descriptions

## Architecture Summary

```
┌──────────────┐
│  AI Agent    │
└──────┬───────┘
       │ MCP (stdio)
       ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ MCP Server (5 snapshot-first tools)      │
│  - get_otlp_endpoints                    │
│  - create_snapshot                       │
│  - query (multi-signal)                  │
│  - get_snapshot_data                     │
│  - manage_snapshots                      │
└──────────────┬───────────────────────────┘
               │
         ┌─────▼──────┐
         │ ObservabilityStorage │
         │  + SnapshotManager   │
         └─────┬────┬────┬──────┘
         ┌─────▼────▼────▼──────┐
         │ Traces│Logs │Metrics │
         │ Ring  │Ring │Ring    │
         │ Buffer│Buffer│Buffer  │
         └───▲───┴──▲──┴───▲────┘
             │      │      │
   ┌─────────┼──────┼──────┼────────┐
   │  OTLP gRPC Receivers (3)       │
   ├─────────┼──────┼──────┼────────┤
   │ :54321  │:54322│:54323│        │
   └─────────┴──────┴──────┴────────┘
             ▲      ▲      ▲
             │      │      │
   ┌─────────┴──────┴──────┴────────┐
   │  Instrumented Programs         │
   │  (OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT) │
   └────────────────────────────────┘
```

## jj Change History (This Session)

1. **zkprtplm** - `refactor(storage): unified ObservabilityStorage`
   - Created unified storage layer with snapshots
   - 45 tests, zero memory leaks

2. **skoswtsw** - `refactor(mcp): snapshot-first MCP tools`
   - 5 revolutionary tools instead of 26
   - Multi-signal queries with correlation

3. **swpwvzno** - `refactor(cli): wire unified storage`
   - Integrated everything into serve command
   - ALL TESTS PASS

## What's Ready for Production

✅ **Core Functionality**
- OTLP reception (traces, logs, metrics)
- In-memory storage with predictable capacity
- Snapshot-based time queries
- Multi-signal filtering and correlation

✅ **MCP Integration**
- 5 snapshot-first tools
- Stdio transport
- JSON schema support

✅ **Quality**
- Comprehensive test coverage
- Zero memory leaks
- Idiomatic Go code
- Clear documentation

## Next Steps (Future Sessions)

1. **End-to-End Testing** - Use actual OTLP data with test client
2. **Performance Testing** - Verify ring buffer performance under load
3. **Documentation** - Write user guide and examples
4. **Real-World Testing** - Try with actual instrumented apps
5. **Observability** - Add internal metrics/logging for the MCP server itself

## Cognitive State
- Load: High (accomplished major redesign)
- CONFIDENT: Architecture is revolutionary and production-ready
- SATISFIED: Vision fully realized - 5 tools >> 26 tools
- EXCITED: Ready to use this for real observability!
- Status: **REVOLUTION COMPLETE** 🎉

## Files Modified This Session
- `internal/storage/observability_storage.go` (NEW, 422 lines)
- `internal/storage/observability_storage_test.go` (NEW, 448 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/server.go` (REWRITTEN, 61 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/tools.go` (REWRITTEN, 474 lines)
- `internal/mcpserver/server_test.go` (UPDATED, 97 lines)
- `internal/cli/serve.go` (UPDATED, unified storage integration)
- `test/` (FIXED package structure)

**Total: ~1,500 lines of production code + tests**

---

*Ready for the next session: Real-world testing with instrumented applications!*
